---
title: "Community detection by graph Voronoi diagrams"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2016_community_detection_by_voronoi
excerpt: ''
date: 2014-06-05
venue: 'New Journal of Physics'
paperurl: 'https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1367-2630/16/6/063007/meta'
citation: 'Deritei, D., Lazar, Z.I., Papp, I., Jarai-Szabo, F., Sumi, R., Varga, L., Regan, E.R. and Ercsey-Ravasz, M., 2014. Community detection by graph Voronoi diagrams. New Journal of Physics, 16(6), p.063007.'
---
Intractable diseases such as cancer are associated with breakdown in multiple individual functions, which conspire to create unhealthy phenotype-combinations. An important challenge is to decipher how these functions are coordinated in health and disease. We approach this by drawing on dynamical systems theory. We posit that distinct phenotype-combinations are generated by interactions among robust regulatory switches, each in control of a discrete set of phenotypic outcomes. First, we demonstrate the advantage of characterizing multi-switch regulatory systems in terms of their constituent switches by building a multiswitch cell cycle model which points to novel, testable interactions critical for early G2/M commitment to division. Second, we define quantitative measures of dynamical modularity, namely that global cell states are discrete combinations of switch-level phenotypes. Finally, we formulate three general principles that govern the way coupled switches coordinate their function.

Video abstract:
<iframe width="560" height="315" src="https://www.youtube.com/embed/1xCyTgGNxHM" frameborder="0" allow="accelerometer; autoplay; encrypted-media; gyroscope; picture-in-picture" allowfullscreen></iframe>

[Download paper here](https://iopscience.iop.org/article/10.1088/1367-2630/16/6/063007/pdf)

Recommended citation:Deritei, D., Lazar, Z.I., Papp, I., Jarai-Szabo, F., Sumi, R., Varga, L., Regan, E.R. and Ercsey-Ravasz, M., 2014. Community detection by graph Voronoi diagrams. New Journal of Physics, 16(6), p.063007.
